README.md, before:

# ovirt-security-groups-demo
Ansible roles and tools to demo networking API security groups in oVirt

## Requirements
* python
* ansible
* openstacksdk

## Motivation and goals
Configure fine grained access control to / from the oVirt VMs attached to
external networks in OVN. Configuring access to those VMs is based on:
* Ports
* Protocols
* Remote IPs
* group membership
* ether type
...

In the networking API, defined in OpenStack by Neutron, there is a tool to
enable these use cases, through [security groups](https://developer.openstack.org/api-ref/network/v2/#security-groups-security-groups).
Using security groups, the user could - for instance - configure ICMP access to
all the VMs in OVN (or a subset of VMs), limit the traffic in the OVN external
networks to web traffic (e.g. tcp port 80). More complex scenarios can be
achieved, for instance, scenarios where some VMs can access a set of services,
whereas others cannot. This latter scenario can be configured either by IP,
subnet CIDR, or semantically, through group membership.

In oVirt, this networking API concept was implement in the
[ovirt-provider-ovn](https://github.com/oVirt/ovirt-provider-ovn) project, and
a thorough design document for that feature is found in the following
[feature page ](https://ovirt.org/develop/release-management/features/network/networking-api-security-groups.html).

The goal of this repo is to provide tools to help the configuration of
security groups, since currently there is no official supported way to do so
other than through the provider's RESTful interface. Furthermore, some example
configurations are also provided.

## Port Security
The networking API port security parameter has two different objectives: it
limits the MAC addresses that can communicate via the logical port, and
also indicates that security groups are applied to the logical port.
This means that a port with active port security that doesn't belong to any
security group will be isolated from the network.

In oVirt, port security is enabled by default. Despite that, connectivity
between the VMs is provided out of the box, through the
[Default group](#default-group) concept.

Port security is an attribute applied to the logical port, **and** also to the
logical network. Port security at network level means that logical ports
created in that network will inherit the port security value from the
network - unless specified at port level.

Updates to the port security at network level **will not** cascade down to the
existing ports - e.g. it will only impact newly created ports.

In oVirt, the user can set the port security for the logical network through
the UI; its value can be either enabled, disabled, or unspecified - in which
case, it will default to the configuration value defined in the [port-security-enabled-default](https://github.com/oVirt/ovirt-provider-ovn#section-network)
attribute.

### Provisioning examples

In this section, ansible tasks to configure the port security of networks
and ports can be found.

TODO

## Entity objects on the networking API
The two relevant entities on the networking API are **security groups** and
**security group rules**.

A security group operates as a container of rules, and can be applied to ports.
The intended use case, is for a user to create a group, add a set of rules to
it, and finally, attach the group to a (set of) port(s).

A security group rule specifies which type of traffic (using L3 / L4 semantics)
can access - or exit - the VM. They are scoped to the security group - e.g. the
rules can have the same data **whenever** they belong to different groups.
A security group rule can also be applied to either *ingress* - traffic incomming to the VM - or *egress* - traffic outgoing from the VM.

The *knobs* on a security group are:
* IP protocol
* ethertype - ipv4 / ipv6
* L4 port range - use max == min to open a single port
* remote ip prefix (using a CIDR), or a single IP
* remote group membership
* direction

Their APIs can be found in:
* [security groups](https://developer.openstack.org/api-ref/network/v2/#security-groups-security-groups)
* [security group rules](https://developer.openstack.org/api-ref/network/v2/#security-group-rules-security-group-rules)

## Default group
The **Default** group's goal is to allow access between all VMs out of the box.

To implement the Default group, four rules are used:
* allow all ingress Ipv4 belonging to the Default group
* allow all ingress Ipv6 belonging to the Default group
* allow all egress Ipv4
* allow all egress Ipv6

When a VM is created, having **port-security-enabled** active, will be
automatically added to the **Default** group, which will allow all VMs
to communicate by default - e.g. the **ingress** rules will be matched,
and traffic allowed into the VM.

The outgoing traffic - e.g. will also match the egress rules - thus allowing
the VM to communicate to the outside world.

### Limitations of the Default group
The Default group cannot be deleted. Never-the-less, its rules can, and new
rules can also be added to it.

Remember that if you delete the rules within the Default group, the
connectivity between the VMs whose ports have it attached **will** break.

## Flat scenario

Using the tools provided in this repo, the Default group concept will be
showcased, and two different configurations will be shown: the first will
grant ICMP access amongst a set of VMs, the second will grant access to a web
server running on one VM. No other kinds of L3 traffic will be allowed.

### ICMP configuration
The following ASCII diagram portrays the goal for this scenario.
In it, there are 3 VMs, all of them belonging to the *icmp* security group.
That group features a single security group rule, allowing ingress ICMP
protocol traffic to the VMs.

```
       +---------------+
       |      nisu     |
       |  <dynamic_ip> |
       |     icmp      |
       +---------------+
           |       x
         icmp     web
           |       x
       +---------------+       +---------------+
       |     net1      |-icmp--|    web_client |
       | 172.20.50.0/24|x-web-x|  <dynamic_ip> |
       +---------------+       |      icmp     |
               |               +---------------+
       +---------------+
       |   web_server  |
       |  <dynamic_ip> |
       |     icmp      |
       +---------------+

```

To configure the above scenario, create one external logical network - having
a subnet on top - through oVirt's UI.

Then, create 3 VMs attached to that external logical network. This can also
be achieved through the UI.

To create the icmp security group, you can use the *create_icmp_security_group*
located in the *playbooks* dir. Make sure your *clouds.yml* file is properly
configured, since that configures the authentication URL and credentials from
the ansible client to your oVirt engine.

```bash
ansible-playbook -i localhost create_icmp_security_group.yml

# check the existing security groups
python list_openstack_entities.py -s
```

Now that the security group - and rule - are created, the ports group
membership has to be updated, to feature the ICMP group. To do that, it is
required to know the security group ID of the icmp group. The python tool can
be used to get the ID. Afterwards, use the *update_ports* playbook, as shown in
the example below:

```bash
ansible-playbook -i localhost update_ports.yml --extra-vars="sec_groups=<icmp_security_group_id>"
```

That playbook can update a single port, or all the existing ports. When the
*port_uuid* variable is not specified, the later occurs - e.g. all ports will
be members of the *icmp* group.

Now the user can see that pinging the VMs is possible, but all other types of
traffic are blocked.

### Web server configuration
In this example, the previous scenario will be reversed - e.g. ICMP traffic
will be blocked, whereas web traffic will be allowed. The scenario is expressed
through the following ASCII diagram:

```bash
       +---------------+
       |      nisu     |
       |  <dynamic_ip> |
       |      web      |
       +---------------+
           x       |
         icmp     web
           x       |
       +---------------+        +---------------+
       |     net1      |xxicmpxx|    web_client |
       | 172.20.50.0/24|---web--|  <dynamic_ip> |
       +---------------+        |      web      |
               |                +---------------+
       +---------------+
       |   web_server  |
       |  <dynamic_ip> |
       |      web      |
       +---------------+
```

The *create_web_based_security_group* playbook can be used to create a new
security group, and to provision it with a rule that allows incomming tcp
traffic to port 80. As previously, use the *list_openstack_entities.py* tool
to get the security group UD, in order to configure the port's afterwards.

```bash
# create the web security group
ansible-playbook -i localhost create_web_based_security_group.yml

# grab it's security group ID using the list_openstack_entities.py tool
python list_openstack_entities.py -s

# update all the logical ports in the system, making them member of the
# web group
ansible-playbook -i localhost update_ports.yml --extra-vars="sec_groups=<web_security_group_id>"
```

Now the user can see that pinging is no longer allowed, but web traffic - e.g.
through curl - is.

Both types of traffic can be enabled, by setting the ports to be members of
both groups:

```bash
ansible-playbook -i localhost update_ports.yml --extra-vars="sec_groups=<web_security_group_id>,<icmp_security_group_id>"
```
## Semantic based access scenario
TODO

Commit message:

Add examples on how to configure port security
Examples on how to configure port security for:
* single port
* all ports connected to a network (and the network)
* all ports in the system

README.md, after:

# ovirt-security-groups-demo
Ansible roles and tools to demo networking API security groups in oVirt

## Requirements
* python
* ansible
* openstacksdk

## Motivation and goals
Configure fine grained access control to / from the oVirt VMs attached to
external networks in OVN. Configuring access to those VMs is based on:
* Ports
* Protocols
* Remote IPs
* group membership
* ether type
...

In the networking API, defined in OpenStack by Neutron, there is an entity to
enable these use cases, through [security groups](https://developer.openstack.org/api-ref/network/v2/#security-groups-security-groups).
Using security groups, the user could - for instance - configure ICMP access to
all the VMs in OVN (or a subset of VMs), limit the traffic in the OVN external
networks to web traffic (e.g. tcp port 80). More complex scenarios can be
achieved, for instance, scenarios where some VMs can access a set of services,
whereas others cannot. This latter scenario can be configured either by IP,
subnet CIDR, or semantically, through group membership.

In oVirt, this networking API concept was implement in the
[ovirt-provider-ovn](https://github.com/oVirt/ovirt-provider-ovn) project, and
a thorough design document for that feature is found in the following
[feature page ](https://ovirt.org/develop/release-management/features/network/networking-api-security-groups.html).

The goal of this repo is to provide tools to help the configuration of
security groups, since currently there is no official supported way to do so
other than through the provider's RESTful interface. Furthermore, some example
configurations are also provided.

## Port Security
The networking API port security parameter has two different objectives: it
limits the MAC addresses that can communicate via the logical port, and
also indicates that security groups are applied to the logical port.
This means that a port with active port security that doesn't belong to any
security group will be isolated from the network.

In oVirt, port security is enabled by default. Despite that, connectivity
between the VMs is provided out of the box, through the
[Default group](#default-group) concept.

Port security is an attribute applied to the logical port, **and** also to the
logical network. Port security at network level means that logical ports
created in that network will inherit the port security value from the
network - unless specified at port level.

Updates to the port security at network level **will not** cascade down to the
existing ports - e.g. it will only impact newly created ports.

In oVirt, the user can set the port security for the logical network through
the UI; its value can be either enabled, disabled, or unspecified - in which
case, it will default to the configuration value defined in the [port-security-enabled-default](https://github.com/oVirt/ovirt-provider-ovn#section-network)
attribute.

### Updating port security on ports or networks

In this section it is shown how to use the sample ansible playbook to configure
the port security of networks and ports can be found.

```bash
# update the port security of a single port
ansible-playbook -i localhost update_port_security.yml \
  --extra-vars="port_security_enabled=true port_uuid=<the_port_uuid>"

# update the port security of a all ports attached to a logical network
# this playbook also updates the port security of all ports connected
# to the given network
ansible-playbook -i localhost update_port_security.yml \
  --extra-vars="port_security_enabled=true network_uuid=<the_network_uuid>"

# update the port security of all logical ports found in the system
ansible-playbook -i localhost update_port_security.yml \
  --extra-vars="port_security_enabled=true"

```

## Entity objects on the networking API
The two relevant entities on the networking API are **security groups** and
**security group rules**.

A security group operates as a container of rules, and can be applied to ports.
The intended use case, is for a user to create a group, add a set of rules to
it, and finally, attach the group to a (set of) port(s).

A security group rule specifies which type of traffic (using L3 / L4 semantics)
can access - or exit - the VM. They are scoped to the security group - e.g. the
rules can have the same data **whenever** they belong to different groups.
A security group rule can also be applied to either *ingress* - traffic incomming to the VM - or *egress* - traffic outgoing from the VM.

The *knobs* on a security group are:
* IP protocol
* ethertype - ipv4 / ipv6
* L4 port range - use max == min to open a single port
* remote ip prefix (using a CIDR), or a single IP
* remote group membership
* direction

Their APIs can be found in:
* [security groups](https://developer.openstack.org/api-ref/network/v2/#security-groups-security-groups)
* [security group rules](https://developer.openstack.org/api-ref/network/v2/#security-group-rules-security-group-rules)

## Default group
The **Default** group's goal is to allow access between all VMs out of the box.

To implement the Default group, four rules are used:
* allow all ingress Ipv4 belonging to the Default group
* allow all ingress Ipv6 belonging to the Default group
* allow all egress Ipv4
* allow all egress Ipv6

When a VM is created, having **port-security-enabled** active, will be
automatically added to the **Default** group, which will allow all VMs
to communicate by default - e.g. the **ingress** rules will be matched,
and traffic allowed into the VM.

The outgoing traffic - e.g. will also match the egress rules - thus allowing
the VM to communicate to the outside world.

### Limitations of the Default group
The Default group cannot be deleted. Never-the-less, its rules can, and new
rules can also be added to it.

Remember that if you delete the rules within the Default group, the
connectivity between the VMs whose ports have it attached **will** break.

## Flat scenario

Using the tools provided in this repo, the Default group concept will be
showcased, and two different configurations will be shown: the first will
grant ICMP access amongst a set of VMs, the second will grant access to a web
server running on one VM. No other kinds of L3 traffic will be allowed.

### ICMP configuration
The following ASCII diagram portrays the goal for this scenario.
In it, there are 3 VMs, all of them belonging to the *icmp* security group.
That group features a single security group rule, allowing ingress ICMP
protocol traffic to the VMs.

```
       +---------------+
       |      nisu     |
       |  <dynamic_ip> |
       |     icmp      |
       +---------------+
           |       x
         icmp     web
           |       x
       +---------------+       +---------------+
       |     net1      |-icmp--|    web_client |
       | 172.20.50.0/24|x-web-x|  <dynamic_ip> |
       +---------------+       |      icmp     |
               |               +---------------+
       +---------------+
       |   web_server  |
       |  <dynamic_ip> |
       |     icmp      |
       +---------------+

```

To configure the above scenario, create one external logical network - having
a subnet on top - through oVirt's UI.

Then, create 3 VMs attached to that external logical network. This can also
be achieved through the UI.

To create the icmp security group, you can use the *create_icmp_security_group*
located in the *playbooks* dir. Make sure your *clouds.yml* file is properly
configured, since that configures the authentication URL and credentials from
the ansible client to your oVirt engine.

```bash
ansible-playbook -i localhost create_icmp_security_group.yml

# check the existing security groups
python list_openstack_entities.py -s
```

Now that the security group - and rule - are created, the ports group
membership has to be updated, to feature the ICMP group. To do that, it is
required to know the security group ID of the icmp group. The python tool can
be used to get the ID. Afterwards, use the *update_ports* playbook, as shown in
the example below:

```bash
ansible-playbook -i localhost update_ports.yml --extra-vars="sec_groups=<icmp_security_group_id>"
```

That playbook can update a single port, or all the existing ports. When the
*port_uuid* variable is not specified, the later occurs - e.g. all ports will
be members of the *icmp* group.

Now the user can see that pinging the VMs is possible, but all other types of
traffic are blocked.

### Web server configuration
In this example, the previous scenario will be reversed - e.g. ICMP traffic
will be blocked, whereas web traffic will be allowed. The scenario is expressed
through the following ASCII diagram:

```bash
       +---------------+
       |      nisu     |
       |  <dynamic_ip> |
       |      web      |
       +---------------+
           x       |
         icmp     web
           x       |
       +---------------+        +---------------+
       |     net1      |xxicmpxx|    web_client |
       | 172.20.50.0/24|---web--|  <dynamic_ip> |
       +---------------+        |      web      |
               |                +---------------+
       +---------------+
       |   web_server  |
       |  <dynamic_ip> |
       |      web      |
       +---------------+
```

The *create_web_based_security_group* playbook can be used to create a new
security group, and to provision it with a rule that allows incomming tcp
traffic to port 80. As previously, use the *list_openstack_entities.py* tool
to get the security group UD, in order to configure the port's afterwards.

```bash
# create the web security group
ansible-playbook -i localhost create_web_based_security_group.yml

# grab it's security group ID using the list_openstack_entities.py tool
python list_openstack_entities.py -s

# update all the logical ports in the system, making them member of the
# web group
ansible-playbook -i localhost update_ports.yml --extra-vars="sec_groups=<web_security_group_id>"
```

Now the user can see that pinging is no longer allowed, but web traffic - e.g.
through curl - is.

Both types of traffic can be enabled, by setting the ports to be members of
both groups:

```bash
ansible-playbook -i localhost update_ports.yml --extra-vars="sec_groups=<web_security_group_id>,<icmp_security_group_id>"
```
## Semantic based access scenario
TODO
